samanusmṛtatāvakāṅghriyugma:
sa manu: paṅkajasambhavāṅgajanmā |
nijamantaramantarāyahīnaṃ
caritaṃ te kathayan sukhaṃ nināya ||1||
samanusmṛta-tāvaka-aṅghri-yugma:	meditating properly on Thy pair of lotus feet
sa: manu:	that Manu (Swayambhuva)
paṅkajasambhava-aṅga-janmā	the son of Brahmaa
nijam-antaram-	his own Manvantara
antarāya-hīnam	free from all hindrances
caritam te kathayan	recounting Thy glories
sukhaṃ nināya	passed peacefully
That Swayambhuva Manu, the son of Brahmaa, spent his own Manvantara peacefully, free from all hindrances, meditating on Thy pair of lotus feet and recounting Thy glories.
samaye khalu tatra kardamākhyo
druhiṇacchāyabhavastadīyavācā |
dhṛtasargaraso nisargaramyaṃ
bhagavaṃstvāmayutaṃ samā: siṣeve ||2||
samaye khalu tatra	at that very time
kardama-ākhya:	(the Prajaapati) named Kardama
druhiṇa-cchāya-bhava:-	born from the shadow of Brahmaa
tadīya-vācā	following his (Brahmaa's) words
dhṛta-sarga-rasa:	keenly interested in creation
nisarga-ramyaṃ bhagavan-tvām-	O Lord! Who are naturally charming
ayutam samā:	for ten thousand years
siṣeve	worshipped (Thee)
During that time the Prajaapati named Kardama who was born from the shadow of Brahmaa, following his (Brahmaa's) words became keenly interested in creation. He worshipped Thee who are naturally charming, for ten thousand years.
garuḍopari kālameghakramaṃ
vilasatkelisarojapāṇipadmam |
hasitollasitānanaṃ vibho tvaṃ
vapurāviṣkuruṣe sma kardamāya ||3||
garuḍa-upari	on Garuda
kāla-megha-kramam	as beautiful as a dark rain-bearing cloud
vilasat-keli-saroja-pāṇi-padmam	holding in Thy hand a lustrous lotus
hasita-ullāsita-ānanam	(with Thy) face lit up with a smile
vibho tvaṃ	O Lord! Thou
vapu:-āviṣkuruṣe sma	(Thy) form did manifest
kardamāya	for Kardama
O Lord! Thou manifested Thy form for Kardama, sitting on Garuda, as beautiful as a dark rain-bearing cloud, holding a lustrous lotus in Thy hand, with your face lit up with a smile.
stuvate pulakāvṛtāya tasmai
manuputrīṃ dayitāṃ navāpi putrī: |
kapilaṃ ca sutaṃ svameva paścāt
svagatiṃ cāpyanugṛhya nirgato'bhū: ||4||
stuvate pulaka-āvṛtāya tasmai	with horripilation over his body, who was praising (Thee) to him
manuputrīm	the daughter of Manu (Devahooti)
dayitām	as wife
nava-api putrī:	also nine daughters
kapilaṃ ca sutam	and Kapil as son
svam-eva paścāt	Thyself finally
svagatiṃ ca-api-anugṛhya	and union with Thee also conferring
nirgata:-abhū:	Thou disappeared
Kardama was praising Thee thrilled with devotion. Thou blessed that he would have Manu's daughter Devahooti as wife. Thou also blessed that he would have nine daughters, that Thou Thyself will be born as his son Kapil and also that he (Kadarma) would finally attain union with Thee.
sa manu: śatarūpayā mahiṣyā
guṇavatyā sutayā ca devahūtyā |
bhavadīritanāradopadiṣṭa:
samagāt kardamamāgatipratīkṣam ||5||
sa: manu:	that Manu
śatarūpayā mahiṣyā	(along with) queen Shatarupaa
guṇavatyā sutayā devahūtyā ca	and the virtuous daughter Devahooti
bhavat-īrita-nārada-upadiṣṭa:	advised by Naarada who was prompted by Thee
samagāt kardamam-	approached Kardama
āgati-pratīkṣaṃ	(who was) awaiting (their) arrival
Manu along with his queen wife Shatarupa and the virtuous daughter Devahooti, as advised by Naarada who was prompted by Thee, approached Kardama who was awaiting their arrival.
manunopahṛtāṃ ca devahūtiṃ
taruṇīratnamavāpya kardamo'sau |
bhavadarcananivṛto'pi tasyāṃ
dṛḍhaśuśrūṣaṇayā dadhau prasādam ||6||
manunā-upahṛtām ca	and given respectfully by Manu
devahūtiṃ taruṇī-ratnam-	Devahooti, a jewel among damsels
avāpya kardama:-asau	having got, that Kardama
bhavat-arcana-nirvṛta:-api	though content with worshipping Thee,
tasyāṃ dṛḍha-śuśrūṣaṇayā	by her dedicated service
dadhau prasādam	(was) pleased with her
Devahooti who was a gem among women was respectfully given by Manu to Kardama. Kardama, though solely delighted in worshipping Thee, was pleased with her by her dedicated service to him.
sa punastvadupāsanaprabhāvā-
ddayitākāmakṛte kṛte vimāne |
vanitākulasaṅkulo navātmā
vyaharaddevapatheṣu devahūtyā ||7||
sa: puna;-	he (Kardama)
tvat-upāsana-prabhāvāt-	because of the glory of Thy worship
dayitā-kāma-kṛte	for fulfilling the desires of his loving wife
kṛte vimāne	in the aerial vehicle which was made
vanitā-kula-saṅkula:	full of female attendants
nava-ātmā	taking on a new body
vyaharat-devapatheṣu	sported in the garden of the gods
devahūtyā	(with) Devahooti
Thereafter Kardama by the glory of worshipping Thee, to fulfill the desires of his loving wife, took on a new body, got an aerial vehicle made, which was full of female attendants, and sported in the garden of the gods along with Devahooti.
śatavarṣamatha vyatītya so'yaṃ
nava kanyā: samavāpya dhanyarūpā: |
vanayānasamudyato'pi kāntā-
hitakṛttvajjananotsuko nyavātsīt ||8||
śata-varṣam-atha vyatītya	then after spending a hundred years
sa:-ayam	that this (Kardama)
nava kanyā: samavāpya	nine daughters begetting
dhanya-rūpā:	who were very beautiful
vana-yāna-samudyata:-api	though preparing to go to the forest
kāntā-hita-kṛt-	wishing to fulfill the desire of his wife (and)
tvat-janana-utsuka:	eager for Thy birth (as his son)
nyavātsīt	stayed on (at home)
After spending a hundred years thus and begetting nine very beautiful daughters, Kardama wanted to take up the ascetic life and retire to the forest. Yielding to his wife's wishes and eagerly awaiting Thy birth as their son, he continued to stay on at home.
nijabhartṛgirā bhavanniṣevā-
niratāyāmatha deva devahūtyām |
kapilastvamajāyathā janānāṃ
prathayiṣyan paramātmatattvavidyām ||9||
nija-bhartṛ-girā	at the words of her husband
bhavat-niṣevā-niratāyām-	who was ever intent on Thy worship
atha deva	then, O Lord!
devahūtyām	to Devahooti
kapila-tvam-ajāyathā	as Kapil Thou were born
janānām	amongst the people
prathayiṣyan	to proclaim
parama-ātma-tatva-vidyām	the knowledge of the truth of the Supreme Being
O Lord! To Devahooti who, on the advise of her husband was ever engaged in worshipping Thee, Thou were born as Kapil in order to teach mankind the means for the attainment of the Supreme Reality.
vanameyuṣi kardame prasanne
matasarvasvamupādiśan jananyai |
kapilātmaka vāyumandireśa
tvaritaṃ tvaṃ paripāhi māṃ gadaughāt ||10||
vanam-eyuṣi kardame prasanne	when Kardama left for the forest happily
mata-sarvasvam-	the entire philosophy (of Thine)
upādiśan jananyai	(Thou) imparted to (Thy) mother
kapila-ātmaka	O Thou incarnate as Kapil!
vāyu-mandira-īśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
tvaritam	hastily
tvaṃ paripāhi	Thou relieve
mām gada-aughāt	me from my many miseries
O Lord of Guruvaayur! Who were incarnate as Kapil, when Kardama left for the forest with a sense of fulfillment, Thou imparted the whole of Thy philosophy to Thy mother. Deign to hastily save me from my many ailments.